---
layout: post
title: "Northern Mongolia"
categories: [miscellaneous]
excerpt: "A 2 week trip to the northern Mongolian reindeer herders"
comments: true
series: 1
authors: [evan, kourtney]
image:
  feature: miscellaneous/FIXME.jpg
  display: true
---

{% capture images %}{{site.url}}/images/miscellaneous/north-mongolia{% endcapture %}

## Day 1: The black market

The text of a nearby ad catches my eye as we wait at the baggage carousel. It’s written in two scripts, and to my surprise, neither of them use the Latin alphabet. I could have at least learned the Mongolian phrase for "_thank you_", I think to myself.

We grab our bags and find the exit. Amongst the people waiting in arrivals I see someone holding a sign that says "Evan and Kourtney". I can tell it's Anuka, our tour guide, based on the pictures of her website. Thank god she’s real.

FIXME Anuka picture

After brief introductions she leads us outside to the parking lot. She introduces us to a tall skinny man named Baagii, her husband. He’ll be our driver for the trip. He doesn’t speak any English, but with a shy smile, he motions for us to hand him our bags.

FIXME Baagii picture

On our way to Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia's capital, Kourtney and I calibrate to Anukas accent as she shares bits of information about Mongolia and Ulaanbaatar. She talks quietly with a friendly demeanor. I can tell she loves her country and is eager to share it with us. We’re in good hands.

"We are a quickly developing nation", Anuka starts. 1.8 million people live in ulaanbaatar. Including undocumented people it may >2 million, which is well over half of Mongolia's total population. Mongolians are contending with a blazingly fast speed of urbanization. Smartphones, 4G networks, TV, 9-5 jobs, fast food, and high rise apartment buildings are pervading the urban lifestyle, and Ulaanbaatar is the hearthstone of this drastic cultural shift.

As we drive through the rolling hill landscape littered with thousands of free-roaming cow, goat, and sheep, we crest over a hill and in the distance we see Ulaanbaatar sprawled out beneath the backdrop of the Khentii mountains. Along the outskirts of the city, white circular tents called _gers_ (similar to _yurts_) sit interspersed among modern buildings and city streets. Traditionally, gers were used by 100% of Mongolians, who traveled nomadically with their livestock, perpetually moving their gers with the change of seasons, conditions, and resource availability. Today, many of them are equipped with satellite dishes and solar panels, showcasing the conveniences of modernity knocking on the doorstep of ancient tradition.

Nearer to the heart of the city, above all else towers massive coal plant chimneys emitting dense smoke, cloaking the heart of the city in a perpetual haze. Ulaanbaatar is the fifth worst polluted city in the world. As we drive further into the city’s center, the gers, shacks, and petrol stations are replaced by a concrete jungle of modern multi-level buildings.

I'm taken aback by the sheer chaos of the traffic. The faded paint on the roads, intended to demarcate lanes, is completely ignored, turning the streets into a lawless frenzy. Traffic lights are sparse, and where they do exist, they seem to serve more as suggestions than mandates. The cacophony of honking horns and engines adds to the unyielding chaos.

As a "fix" to Ulaanbaatar's traffic problem, the government has instated police-enforced access restriction at critical bottlenecks in the city traffic flow. This is done by categorizing cars into two groups based on whether the first digit of your license plate number is odd or even. If you’ve got the wrong license plate for a given time, you aren't allowed to enter the region of the city. I can't imagine the level of traffic without this system in place.

Eventually we make it to our hotel, which will serve as a launch point for the trip, which starts tomorrow. Our plan today is relaxed: have a nap, buy supplies for the trip, go to a museum, and get a good night’s rest.

After our nap it’s 1pm and we head downstairs to meet Anuka and Baagii. To buy supplies for the trip, we head to the black market, a place where Ulaanbaatar's chaotic hustle and bustle is perhaps best embodied. You can buy anything and everything at the black market, Anuka explains. Clothes, shoes, electronics, containers, tools, building materials, cabinetry, camping gear, school supplies, plastic, art, horse saddles, livestock, meat, fruit, dry goods--the list goes on and on, and includes more nefarious things like bullets and presumably drugs. Few needs can't be met at the black market.

We find ourselves in the heart of the bustling bazaar. Mongolians all around us are buying and selling, trying to score themselves the best deal they can find. Sellers showcase how well their product works, while buyers, hiding their interest in a thinly veiled performance of apathy, point out flaws in the demonstration. After successful deals, everyone walks away happy. After failed deals, vendors return to their smartphones, shaking their heads, perhaps getting in one last verbal jab, while the unsuccessful customers try their luck with the neighboring vendor, who sells nearly identical products.

Anuka expertly dips and dodges through the densely packed stalls. To give a sense of scale, it takes two minutes of walking just to get out of the shoe section. Exchanging words with the nearest vendors for directions, we finally arrive at the camping section. Kourtney and I buy two sleeping bags, and Kourtney buys a warm fleece. Encouraged by Anuka to haggle, we weakly negotiate, but in truth, since the prices were so cheap compared to our Western standards, we decided the few dollars we could have shaved off the price were better off in the vendors' hands anyways.

Next, we wanted to bring gifts for the reindeers herders and perhaps any nomadic families that we stay with. Relying on Anuka's knowledge of the locals, we settle on pencil bags that we stuffed with ornate pencils, erasers, and pencil sharpeners for the kids. For the adults, we bought lightbulbs powered by AC battery cables, flashlights powerable via a multitude of methods, battery-powered headlamps, miniature binoculars, and medium- and large-sized thick plastic containers for milking and berry picking. Against Anuka's advice, we also purchased fifty 22 calibre bullets, which are particularly useful, if not illegal, in the Taiga for hunting.

Afterwards, we head back to the car. On the way, an old drunkard tosses an empty vodka bottle in the direction of a woman sitting on a concrete block and shouts. It slides on the dirt and then comes to a stop near her feet. "Do you want to drink with me? No one can drink more than me", Anuka translates. The woman didn't bat an eye, indicating her battle-hardened experience in dealing with drunks. Alcoholism is a major issue in Mongolia, particularly in the city, where perpetually drunk Mongolians loiter Ulaanbaatar day and night. Anuka offers to us her opinion that the solution is a more stringent allocation of welfare. It makes me want to get out of the city.

We spend the rest of the day driving throughout the city, visiting the Buddhist monastery, getting some classic Mongolian fast food, and visiting the Chinggis Khaan Museum. On the way back to the hotel, a Mongolian family beside us in traffic sings along to a traditional Mongolian ballad that blasts from their car speakers. Their baby, standing on the lap of someone in the back seat, hangs his head out of the rolled down window, staring at Kourtney and I smiling back at him. Well fed and sleepy, Anuka and Baagii drop us off at the hotel, and we agree to reconvene the next day at 10:00am for the start of our big journey.

## Day 2: Journey to the monastery

Today we will go to the famous monastery, FIXME.

We drive through the morning traffic slowly but surely. The rapid growth of the city is glaringly obvious when looking at the construction of high rise apartments. For every occupied high rise, there is another under construction. And building contracts are clearly carried out in bulk, whereby as many as 12 identical high rises are erected concurrently, side by side. 

Outside of the city, we stop at a road-side restaurant. The kitchen is within the ger, and outside is where the customers sit, underneath an awning protruding from the ger's entrance. The furniture is patchwork and haphazard, best explained by Baagii's seat being an extricated car seat. Kourtney gets FIXME and I get FIXME. It was delicious. Alongside our meals, the waitress, a 14 year old girl on summer break, brings us milk tea, an essentiality of Mongolian life. FIXME.

In the car, Anuka gives us our second Mongolian lesson. Yesterday we learned, _sembano_ (hi) and _bayarlala_ (thank you). Today, we learn _tawny nerr himbe?_ (What's your name) and _mini nerr_ (my name is). We practice on Baagii, who somehow strikes a balance between laughing at us while also providing genuine encouragement.

At a nondescript location somewhere along the highway, we slow down, turn onto a dirt road, and leave the asphalt behind us. Offroading would become the new norm for our trip.

After getting turned around once or twice in the labyrinth of dirt roads, the car gets stuck during a creek crossing. After an all hands on deck scenario in which Kourtney, Baagii, and I push in unison while Anuka mans the wheel, we finally get the car on the right side of the creek. Kourtney remarks that it was the most exciting part of the trip so far. Anuka assures her there is a lot more where that came from.

The monastery is closed, so after a nicely cooked meal, we retire to the tourist camp, where a ger is waiting for the four of us. In bed, Anuka explains a little bit about the simple and yet effective ger architecture. The ceiling is supported by a central wooden support with a circular window on top. The woodstove sits underneath this, and the chimney feeds through a segment of the window. From the center piece emanate around 80 spokes. Layers of plastic and fabric lie on top of these spokes, forming the roof.

## Day 3: Journey to Muurun

- A herd of cows came to say hi during breakfast
- Monastery
- The monks

I woke up to Baagii braking. A weather-seasoned nomadic man was herding his horses across the road with a dirt bike. Anuka and Baagii exchange some dialogue and then Anuka explains we will go say hi to the nomad and his family.

We park the car in the side of the ride, climb up the dirt bank and onto the prairie. The man and his wife are by corralling a herd of at least 30 horses, some young, some old. The young ones are tied to a line pegged to the ground. This is to make sure the mothers return to their camp.

Baagii takes the lead and starts talking with them. Kourtney and I keep a tentative distance. Aren't we intruding? But the conversation is going well and it becomes obvious they know each other, so we get closer and start snapping pics of the horses.

As Baagii and Anuka speak with the nomads and laugh, the woman is milking the horses. The procedure is as follows: they release the foal from the rope line, it starts to suck on the mare's teet, at which point the foal is removed, the woman comes in with her bucket, and milks. Meanwhile the man steadies the mother and if it's a feisty one, he holds its leg so it doesn't kick the bucket or the woman.

Every two hours they milk the horses, Anuka tells us. It is unendingly exhausting work, and you can tell that to them it was clock work. They process the dairy in multiple ways, eat what they can, and sell the rest at market, Anuka continued. In the traditional nomadic lifestyle, summertime is a season of preparation. To survive the upcoming winter, that means no meat is to be eaten. With little going on agriculturally due to the intense dry climate of Mongolia, that leaves a primarily dairy-based diet.

"Tawny nerr kimbe?" I ask. "Handa", she replies. Handa is short, stout, and has bright red cheeks. Anuka explains to me that this is an indication of being outside so many hours a day. When winter comes, her skin will turn nearly black due to a dramatic change. Not only will the intensely cold and dry climate suck the blood out of her face, but apparently her diet will shift to primarily meat. Anuka reiterates, "you have no idea how much meat we eat in winter". Mind you, this is after Anuka ordered us a massive serving of beef dumpling (Essentially fried beef pancakes) for lunch the day before at a roadside ger restaurant. Apparently this dramatically affects their body. FIXME research.

After some language-transcending humor, including Kourtney being asked to milk the horses and me catching a ride on the back of the man’s dirt bike, we're invited to their home, a white ger around 100m down the hill. As we saunter down, I inquired to how Anuka knew these nomads.

"I've never met them, and neither has Baagii. Anyone is welcome to stay with anyone 24 hours today and they are treated like family". Kourtney and I are flabbergasted to hear this. In our culture, you don't just walk onto someone's land and expect to be received with open arms. In fact, doing this is extremely dangerous. Perhaps this can in part be explained by a fundamental difference between us and the nomads: in Mongolia, no one owns the land. Since there is a shared conception of the land, this may have a profound influence on the interrelationships between Mongolian people and how they congregate. Kourtney also points out that because life is so difficult here, people need to band together in a sort of "we're all in this together" mentality. In other words, people rely on their literal and proverbial neighbors. Fostered over millennia, this generosity and hospitality has penetrated deep into nomadic culture, and persists today as strong as ever.

Before entering the ger, I notice some fermenting cow milk being pressed down by two large rocks. Anuka explains that they are making a sort of hard, thin cheese. In fact, some was already fully processed and baking in the sun. Anuka and I grab a chunk to share. It's very dry, sour and salty. It was an intriguing taste, far outside my realm of familiarity. I probably won't be asking for seconds.

Inside, we sit on some stools. To the right of the entrance is a bed that Handa is sitting on. At the far end of the entrance, the man, whose name I asked but could not pronounce, is sitting near a small table. They laid out some bread and horse surcream. FIXME describe surcream.

At the far end of the entrance, near the man, was a highly decorated cabinet with a home phone, some seemingly buddhist items, and a mirror. My eyes are drawn to the left side of the ger, where a very, very lack sack hangs from a strong beam of wood. It's made of an old, large animal hide that has been stitched together in two pieces. It looks like it has a capacity of at least 100L. Handa walks over and pours her newest batch of mare milk into the sack. From the sound of the pour I can tell the sack is nearly full, presumably with more mare's milk.

After giving the contents a quick stir, Handa fills a plastic jug by dunking it into the sack, and then places the jug on the table. Wasting no time, the man procures a decently sized wooden bowl that he fills to the brim, and then takes a long pull. After wiping the milk from his moustache, he replaces what he had drank by pouring more into the bowl, and then passes it to me. Clearly its my turn. Remembering what Anuka had told me previously about receiving with my right hand, I tentatively take the bowl and look inside. The sides of the bowl have small chunks of rancid dairy, and on top of the liquid is a thin film that I had watched the man gently blow to one side of the bowl before sipping (gulping). Everyone is watching, curiously and with anticipation. What will the foreigner think? Emulating the man as closely as possible, I blow the film off to the side and touch the the bowl to my lips and start drinking. Sour and bubbly, it tasted nothing like I expected. Sort of like kefir. I think I liked it. I pass back the bowl and the ritual continues. The man fills the bowl, looks at someone, and said person would receive the bowl and sip from it, then passing it back.

I ask Anuka what I was drinking. This is Mongolia's national drink, _koumice_. FIXME describe more. When offered koumice, it is a sign of respect that you must not refuse, and the more you can drink in one sip, the better. But never drink the whole bowl, she continues. Perhaps it's just a superstition, but supposedly this is a guarantee for a bad milking yield the next day.

Apparently it is a proud position to host visitors, especially if they are foreign. As such, they are very interested in our situation. Anuka translates everything as the questions roll in: What is your itinerary? Why did you come to Mongolia? Do you think it’s weird we drink from one bowl? I explain that we are in Mongolia to learn about cultures that are different from ours, so we can be more mindful about which cultural practices we engage in within our own culture. It is a complex concept to translate, but I can tell that whatever Anuka said resonated with Handa, as she paused her normally talkative and smile-filled demeanor to listen intently, nodding with understanding.

I tell them they are very friendly and explain that from our countries, the level of hospitality they have shown us might require years of knowing each other. How bizarre must that seem to them?

Handa's youngest son comes in and shyly sits down beside her. He loves Michael Jordan and has a Michael Jordan jersey. After learning Kourtney is from Chicago, Handa says he wants to write a letter that we will give to Michael Jordan. All the adults laugh at the impossibility.

We need to get back onto the road, so we say our goodbyes, Handa gifts us a big bottle of koumice, not expecting or asking for anything in return. But before leaving, we gift them 20000 MNT as a thank you koumice and their hospitality. At first she declines, so I hand it to her son. They stand outside their ger and wave to us as we drive back onto the road.

We drive for another couple hours until we make it to just outside Murun, where Anuka had arranged for us to spend the night in a tourist camp. As we approach our ger, a very loud and drunk man stumbles out of the neighboring ger and Anuka immediately turns around. "You will have a very bad night. You will not get any sleep", she says. Back at reception, she throws some assertive words towards the employee, and before we knew what was happening Kourtney and I are spending the night in a small, one room cabin in a more secluded section of the camp. After a game of kill all the flies, we settle into the calm of night, far away from the ruckus of our neighbors (and flies).

## Day 4: To Tsagaannuur

One does not simply get to the reindeer herders. It is an extremely remote area. Certainly the most remote place Kourtney and I have ever been. Before the big journey north, Baagii takes the car to a mechanic and gets the suspension checked out. Then we're off.

I thought we would travel at least a couple of hours on the asphalt, but after 20 minutes, we turn onto a dirt road. Little did we know, that would be the last time we see a concrete road for days.

Road is a generous road for what we're driving on. It is essentially tire tracks that split and converge as people decide which path makes most sense given the weather, their vehicle, and where they're headed. Whichever path we take, I'm holding onto the holy shit handlebars nonstop.

We start up a mountain hill and after some discussion in Mongolian with Anuka, Baagii turns us around, deciding that path would be too muddy. As a Tsagaannuur local, Anuka has traveled to and from Murun many times in her life. "There are many paths to Tsagaannuur... and you can of course always make your own path", she adds.

The landscape is changing here. Away from the Murun and its sought after asphalt, the true expansiveness of Mongolia begins to reveal itself. Ancient mountains covered in nothing but short grass and rocks. And no matter how remote we get, everywhere we see gers.

Strikingly, patches of woods with sharp boundaries flourish on certain mountain flanks, usually on the south slopes. Anuka says this is due to elements of wind and sunlight.

We make our way into a valley, where the nomads are making camp. In late summer, gers are strategically placed in the open valley, where cooling breezes pass between the mountains, providing respite from the flies that swarm within the nearby forests. Additionally, when you have no running water and have to fetch it yourself, setting up camp nearby the valley's river is clutch. But the weather is changing and in a few weeks time they will move closer to the forests in the encompassing mountains to setup autumn camp. Here the wind is less, making it warmer, and the flies will be dormant as the weather continue to get colder.

The "road" is taking a toll on the Lexus, and Baagii has to make frequent stops to cool the engine. During of these, we're approached by a man walking alongside his horse. Baagii starts talking with him, and we do our ritual of asking what his name is (pretty much the only thing we know how to say), and then unsuccessfully repeating their name back to them. Before long his buddy in a purple deel and vibes for days pulls up on his motorcycle. 

We stop 20 minutes later to eat lunch while Baagii fixes the car suspension (yet again). Anuka prepares a pasta with fresh veggies and rehydrated beef. Rehydrated meat is amazing. It's light, doesn't expire, compact, easy to rehydrate, and delicious. When Mongolians kill an animal, usually in November, they often dedicate two legs for dried meat: they cut it into thin strips and hang it for the winter. Then by April it is ready to eat.

During lunch, Kourtney asks if Anuka and Baagii ever disagree about which way to go. Anuka says they frequently bicker about which way is best, and the "I told you so"'s inevitably come out when the car ends up stuck in the mud. Fighting is in every culture, I say. Baagii thinks this is especially funny. The friendship is growing.

After a gorgeous mountain we cross a muddy river and head up to a fork in the road. Two potential mountain passes. We opt right. It was intense. We break in the middle to let the engine cool and drink koumice to hype ourselves up. The slopes on either side are steep, and we consider whether Baagii should take this one on his own, while we walk up. But instead, we go for it altogether, gaining as much speed as possible. It was a hold your breath moment with cliff side to our left and right. When we're in the clear everyone is smiling.

After the mountain pass, we descend into the valley, where a small village lies. It's a common place to stop for food for passersby traveling to and from the remote north. Day or night, the restaurant will open for a bus full of travelers. We make it to the village. An old man with but a few teeth sits at a security booth with a rudimentary gate with a defunct chainsaw as a counterweight. The village security officer gets out of his booth.  A few works are spoken and the conversation ends with the za on both sides. He raises the gate by releasing a drawstring and the chainsaw pulls the log up. We drive through and over the bridge that days ago would have seemed rickety but now seems like a glorious architectural feat.

Autumn is midway through and the grass and trees are beginning to turn, creating a kaleidoscope of color. "It will be even better when we return Anuka", says. The more we drive north the more orange we’re seeing.

We are slowed by a herd of a out 40 horses who are blocking the road. Their owners are nowhere in sight. They live the ideal lifestyle here in Mongolia, free and nearly wild. We stop for a quick koumice break. According to legend, Chinggis Khaan says you should drink more horse milk than water.

At the top of a mountain is a collection of 13 _ovoos_. An ovoo is a shrine composed of branches, rocks, and multicolored silk fabrics, each color representing a natural element (sun, sky, water, etc.). They are typically found at the top of mountains and mark border crossings, and serve as checkpoints either in the beginning or the end of a journey. We weren't sure which one we were at.

Going by Anuka's example, we grab three pebbles and make our way around the central ovoo, doing three rounds in a clockwise motion. While you loop around the sacred space, it's customary to throw the pebbles onto it, adding to its stature. After that, you send a wish out into the universe. Since this ovoo site has so many ovoos, we move to the ones linked with our respective Chinese zodiac sign and repeat the process.

Baagii pours out 3 cups of koumice, flinging each skyward into air before letting it meet the earth. Finishing his ritual, he turns towards me and notices I had been watching. He tells us he's offering his koumice to the world around him. It gave me pause. Baagii's connection to the land is evident. He believes in these practices. This is not just a touristy thing to do. This is genuinely how Baagii lives.

After ovoo mountain, we return to the treacherous roads. There are river crossings, tire-puncturing rocks littered like landmines, worn out ditches filled with mud and water. Trenches and ravines, paths splitting, dividing and merging like capillaries. In the rare instance that an oncoming car is sighted, drivers roll down their windows to discuss the road conditions: Which ways are muddy? How high is the water level of the upcoming river? Is the bridge passable?

We will take at least 9 hours today to get from Murun to Tsagaannuur. The koumice in my stomach lurches and churns. I've never been car sick but maybe this is the recipe. Understandably, improved road conditions drive much of the election cycle. Candidates visit all the villages by helicopter, and then sing about promises of road infrastructure. Famous people are ushered in and perform concerts, and free vodka is handed out to restore voter faith from the last election. But post election, the promises of roads fade like the distant hum of their departing helicopters.

After endless hours, we arrive "Red Mountain Village", a necessary checkpoint on our journey to Tsagaannuur. Here, there are motorcycles everywhere. More generally, motorbikes reign supreme in Mongolia. They are cheap on gas, cheap to purchase, easy to repair, and can traverse roads and bridges that cars struggle with. With the introduction of the Chinese motorcycle in the 1990s, and its widespread proliferation throughout the country in the following decades, horseback riding has greatly diminished. Increasingly so, Mongolians are traveling, transporting goods, carrying out errands, and herding by motorcycle rather than by horseback. It's an example like many others found in Mongolia: modern technologies threatening to overwrite a lifestyle maintained for thousands of years, and the Mongolian people and government trying to strike a balance between modernity and tradition. And the pressure of modernity pushes unrelentingly against the age-old customs and traditions of nomadic culture.

We see a bunch of activity outside a tight cluster of three gers. The men and women are saddling up horses. Someone is drinking. "They are going to horse race", Anuka determines. "But we can't go. If we do, we can’t leave. Evan not be able to walk, and Evan no translator". After a moment, I understand the riddle. She's saying we'll get too drunk and we won't be able to get to Tsagaannuur. After yesterday's encounter with the incredibly hospitable nomads, I understand that she's serious: if we visit them, we would be culturally obligated to get obliterated. We drive on.

An hour later, Baagii let me drive the car. With ditches and sharp rocks scattered everywhere, it was slow going. But even still, there was something amazing about having so much choice. There were no roads, just open grass plains and tire tracks serving as suggestions.

A tranquil mood envelopes us as Baagii drives towards the darkening horizon. The car squeaks with each passing bump as we're thrown from side to side. Like a sailor acclimated to rough seas, I've found a rhythm in the chaos of the bumpy road jostling our luggage and personnel. In the far distance, an adolescent herds his sheep by motorcycle towards an out of sight ger. Then, on a road that seemingly never ends, we arrive at our final river crossing. "The final boss", Kourtney says. Realizing the remark has fallen upon deaf ears, we subsequently explain the massive amount of cultural context required for that to make sense to Anuka.

After the river, we soon make it to "White Lake". This is the lake upon which Tsagaannuur village was formed. Anuka explains that no one swims, bathes, or washes their clothes in the lake out of respect for its purity. This respectful relationship with the lake allows Tsagaannuurians to drink its water and maintain a healthy ecosystem that teems with a famous "white fish", known throughout Mongolia for being tasty. Anuka notes however, that high winds are often blowing roadside trash into the lake.

At the top of the final mountain pass we arrive at the gates of Tsagaannuur. There are two guys with parked motorcycles under a small gazebo and a bench. Anuka jokes that this is the village's Irish Pub. The gate has two metal statues. After stopping to take a picture, Anuka shyly reveals that her father crafted the pieces of art.

When we arrive, Anuka and Baagii are greeted by Anuka's parents are their precious child. She's 18 months old and squealing with energy. We give them time to catch up with their family while we duck into an offshoot of their home where Anuka's mother used to operate a guesthouse. It was during Anuka's childhood where she interacted with foreign guests that her ideas of becoming a Mongolian tour guide started forming. Without taking our surroundings in with any great detail, Kourtney and I clamber into the beds that look comfiest and fall asleep nearly immediately. What a day.

## Day 5: Horseback to the Western Reindeer Herders

It is September 1st, the first day of school in the village. After breakfast, we head to the school to check out the special occasion. As we approach, we hear speeches and singing performances emanating from the center of the village through shoddy speakers. Within the school grounds, parents and children gather around the makeshift stage: a square piece of concrete embedded in the otherwise grassy school grounds. Here, songs and ceremonies are taking place. A teacher accepting a Teacher of the Year Award, a 6 year old child singing a song about September 1st, the village leader asking for donations. Children and parents sway to the rhythm of the music during this joyous day (not much learning is happening).

The pupils range from 1st to 12th grade. Independent of age, the boys are wearing ties and white shirts tucked into dress pants and the girls are wearing pleated skirts and cardigans. About half of the students live within the village, whereas the other half still live in nomadic families. Throughout Mongolia, villages with schools host students deriving from the nomadic families who live in the surrounding mountains, plains, and valleys. However, unlike other villages, Tsagaannuur also hosts children of reindeer herding families in the Taiga.

Whether their families are classic nomads or reindeer herding nomads, the nomadic children are boarded in a partially government funded dormitory that resides on the school grounds. It is the only brick house I saw on the village. Beside it is the old dormitory, a single story wooden building. This is the dormitory many of Anuka's classmates lived in when she was a child. The living conditions have improved greatly between old and new. There are dormitory teachers who take care of the children, a cook, who feeds them 3 times a day, and a custodian who keeps the fire stove burning from October through May.

Anuka shows us another upgrade, the school toilets. Back in her day, the toilets were just a pit with planks stretching across to stand. Now they have seats to sit on.

It’s obvious that education is extremely important to the villagers, the nomads, and the reindeer herders. "Are the nomads or herders sacrificing their culture by sending their children to school?" I ask Anuka.

"No. They stay with their family for the first 6 years of life. After this, they are already know the lifestyle". Her response illustrates to me how capable children can become when thrust into such a hard-pressing lifestyle. They are capably riding horses by 4-5 years old, and are already taking over roles required for the family's survival, such as goat and sheep herding. What was I doing at 5 years old?

After around 40 minutes, during which time Anuka catches up with all the village folk, we strip ourselves away from the festivities of September 1st. A big day lies ahead of us: today we head into the Taiga to meet western reindeer herders.

The journey starts off with a 20km offroad trek to meet our horse guide, Lhagwa. He is a nomad with hundreds of livestock--including many horses, some of which he uses for horse trekking services.

After waiting a bit at the meetup spot, Lhagwa shows up on one of his horses and ushers us to meet him at an alternative location. At the alternate spot, his wife and a handful of horses are hanging out.

It takes around an hour to saddle the horses and prepare all of our stuff. One of the horses is given the special task of carrying all of our luggage and equipment. Strong and intelligent horses are chosen for this job because the packed gear rests on either side, and the horse must have the physical awareness to account for this when choosing which path to take through the forest. And if a path is too skinny the horse must be smart enough to back up and find another path.

As we gear up for our journey into the Taiga, there's a natural rhythm to the preparations. Anuka boils water, Lhagwa and his wife saddle the horses, and Baagii, packs the saddlebags. Soon, some of us are relaxing on the grass, enjoying a casual snack. Baagii helps me into his deel, showing me how the buttons and silk sash work. Then, Lhagwa and Baagii load up the bag horse. Through my foreign eyes, the entire process has a captivating fluidity where everyone seamlessly transitions between work and play, every action flowing seamlessly into the next, always accompanied with constant chatter and laughter, as if we have all the time in the world.

When everything is in it's right place, we set off. The herders live northwest of Tsagaannuur and to get there, we need to ascend up a mountain by horseback which leads to a flat marshy bog. From there we need to cross the bog and then descend down an offshoot that leads into the FIXME valley. The trip duration depends on which camp the herders are situated at. Since Anuka heard wind that they're currently in the Autumn camp, that means the trip will take around 4 hours by horse.

After ascending the gentle mountain slope, we stop for lunch as we gaze out at what lies ahead of us. From far away, the bog looks like easy and beautiful terrain-- especially this time of year, with the Autumn colors. However, the terrain is anything but gentile, Anuka assures us.

After lunch we saddle up. Being exceptionally tall for Mongolian standards, I was experiencing some knee pain from the stirrups being too short, so Lhagwa lengthened them to the last notch in the leather. Still too short, but it is what it is. We descend down to the bog and it quickly becomes clear how treacherous it really is. Extending for kilometers, the bog is a patchwork of soft moss, mud pools, and bog water that reflects an oily blue sheen.

It is in the thick of the bog that I come to realize that we aren't just riding horses as an alternate way of travel. This isn't just a "horse ride" in an American State Park. This in fact, the only way to get to the Taiga. Traversing by foot is impossible, though technically possible in Winter when land freezes over. Cars are an obvious no, and motorcycles are no better. That leaves horses, reindeers, and helicopters. And this was no easy feat, even for the horses, who regularly "broke through" the ground, ending chest deep in mud.

Throughout this journey, ever arduous for the horses, us humans were enjoying a relatively peaceful bliss,  where the only sounds were the squelching of our horse's legs navigating the thick bog. After an hour or two of marching, the landscape starts changing. The terrain steepens, the ground firms, and trees sprout.

We descend further into a large river valley. After a quick traversal along the basin of the valley, far in the distance we see a smoke stack. As we get closer, we can see the teepee, along with two others. Triangulated between them lies more than 25 reindeer, some young, some old, some white, some brown. The babies are tied to logs, and the concerned parents are close by.

Anuka ushers us into the smoking tent and then tends to the horses with Lhagwa. We enter the tent and inside is Sartlong. She kindly gives us some milk tea to drink, but is otherwise very shy.

After 5 minutes her husband man comes in with Anuka, who says, "now you should ask him questions". I feel a bit awkward, as the interaction feels transactional.

"What do you love about Mongolia?"

"The freedom. In the village, it's too busy. Out here, there are no rules. We can live with our animals and do whatever we want."

After seeing how the nomads live, I'm beginning to realize the truth of his opinion. Back home, we live in huge cities and everything is rules.

"Are you scared for Winter?"

A little bit of context about this question. Every November, the women move south, where the weather is better and they are closer to the village. Here they can stay closer to their children, who are attending the village school if they are of age, buy supplies more easily, and get to a hospital more quickly if disaster strikes. Meanwhile, the men migrate deep into the Taiga, following the reindeer, who thrive in the harsh winter conditions. They'll stay here with the reindeer, either in isolation or with others, if they're reindeer herds happen to coalesce.

In general, the reindeers are not necessarily herded. The only tried and true method for corraling this particularly wild form of livestock is to tie their babies down near the camp site.

Anyways, Godla answers the question as to whether he's scared for Winter, answering firmly that he's not scared at all--he's even excited. He adds that if he's missing his wife, he'll return after a month. Otherwise, he'll stay longer. They laugh.

FIXME Kourtney’s questions

"How has technology changed since his father was a herder?"

"So many things. TV to listen to the weather station (and soap operas), solar panels, chainsaws, too many things to mention."

"Do you want more technology or do you want to balance tradition with modernity?"

"We want more technology but nothing works here except solar."

There is a cultural divide between reindeer herders depending that depends on the region they inhabit, either western or eastern Taiga. In the east, the reindeer herders stick together in a large community of about 50(FIXME) families. In the west, where we are right now, the herders tend to live in isolation, or in smaller groups.

For example, currently in this camp there are three teepees and three families. There is Godla and his wife, Sartlong. Very bizarrely, they met because a film that was made about a reindeer herder who could catch wild reindeer. They wanted it to be authentic, and Godla could genuinely catch wild reindeer, so he was cast into the role. Sartlong was suggested as the love interest role. Fast forward, they are happily married with a kid, who just left to school. She's staying in the dormitories in Tsagaannuur. Sartlong's brother lives in the tent where there is a TV (more on that later). Tragically, his son passed away last month, just a year old. The baby was running a high fever, so they rushed him to the village by reindeer. Unfortunately, there was no doctor there, nor was their a nurse. So the baby died, and apparently the police are investigating.

Reindeer herding is a life consumed by following--and most importantly--protecting the reindeer, as they are constantly being hunted by bears. In the teepee, Godla explains that the camp has lost five, just in the last two weeks.

Sure enough, right as twilight is turning to night, when we're back in our teepee, we hear the dogs barking relentlessly. Then, a gunshot! Rushing outside, we meet Godla outside his tent, rifle in hand. He's peering across the river, where the dogs are still barking. Later in the tent, Anuka translates that he wasn't aiming to kill, as it's against shamanistic religion to kill it unless it threatens his life. He shows us his gun, a dated Russian rifle. I realize it would be a great time to gift Godla with a pair of pocket binoculars we had bought at the black market. When I give it to him, he takes with both hands, touches it to his head, and inspects every feature. He looks up, and grins, "Bayarlalaa".

## Day 6: Shaman ritual

Today godla will perform a ritual. He is a shaman. For 7 generations his family were shamans. When his father died he became depressed for 3 years. He didn’t know what was happening to him. He was sleeping all the time, not sleeping at all. He dreamt all the time about the beating of a drum. Finally he decided to follow the bear of the drum and it led him to the a point in the first. There, it stopped. He then knew he should become a shaman and trained with someone.

This morning we learned a card game called 13 cards. It’s like poker and Mongolians love it. I’m glad we brought the cards. After photographing some of the reindeer as they came back from camp we went inside and it started to rain heavily. There, we played cards for hours in the teepee. I think they expected us to be cash cows but we were probably better than they thought.

My back hurt so much, there is something wrong with me. 

When the rain stopped we went and picked blueberries. Anuka paid for her university tuition by picking blueberries for 8 hours a day for 20 days of each summer. She said 500g could be sold for about 5000. I explained the same would cost 20 at the grocery store. We parted ways as we scavenged and I started thinking Anuka wants to pick blueberries in the states. Of course this is impossible, so I later explained the the farming industry, and that picking blueberries is not good money, due to all the land being owned. Near the end Anuka asked if we wrrr bitten by mosquitoes. She said now that we take from the forest, we are giving back.

Our diet with the herders consisted of beef ribs that Anuka brought and hung in the teepee, bread and fried bread with blueberry jam, milk tea, and noodles, all prepared fresh. Anuka is a more capable cook with limited ingredients, a pot, a wood fire stove, and a river of fresh water than I am with a grocery store and a souped up electric appliance kitchen.

That evening we were told that Godla was going to perform a ceremony. It is a special occasion because he only does them once or twice a month. It is an incredible burden, physically, emotionally, and spiritually. While we didn’t come for a ceremony, we felt honoured that godla was willing to perform one. Anuka prepared a bottle of vodka for the ceremony.

My question was should I work for a company or make my own company. Kourtney asked whether we should move to Europe or stay located closer to my family.

The evening started off extremely casually. We played cards. We’re laughing and chatting. Coach Lhagwa is coaching Sartlong on a final hand. Anuka is peering over Godla's shoulder. It’s husband versus wife. Who will take the prize money?

At the head of the teepee he’s prepared his ceremonial stage. From it hang white torn cloth pieces, white in one side, black and red on the other. Each strip represents a ceremony that he’s done. There are hundreds. They cluster together to the point that they lose their individual identities. White represents people who he has helped within the first half of the moon cycle. These are sanctioned. Whereas the red and black occur in the second half of the moon cycle. These represent instances where he has performed a ceremony during the second half of the moons cycle, which is taboo and traditionally is paid for with blood sacrifice. Shamans no longer perform blood sacrifices. 

There was a stark juxtaposition of the ceremonial stage being illuminated by a clunky portable battery that's powering an incandescent lightbulb. Beside the ceremonial stage was his huge drum. The drum was made of a young deers skin. The wood is created from special wood, like getting hit by lightning or very old trees.

Turned away from us, his wife and Lhagwa start dressing him in a weighted and heavily ornate collage of animal skins draping as individual strands, furs, and fabrics upon fabrics. He needed the help of two people to get it on. It was so big and thick it was voluminous. Even asymmetric, the right side of his back was a huge bulge, giving him a hunched back. He looked like a yak with dreadlocks. On his head he wore a vulture and eagle feather mask and a something that covered his eyes. Although he was a shorter man, silhouetted by the dimly lit teepee, he looked so powerful and ominous and huge.

Then he started drumming. softly at first. Each hit generated a deep, muted thud. he moved towards and away from ceremonial stage as he drummed. At the altar he held the drum low and by the center of the teepee he held it high. His movement was controlled. The drum beats got progressively louder. He then started speaking in tuulun. Like the drumming, it got progressively more intense. His voice was strained, high pitched, and mantric. As the ceremony proceeded, he progressively began disengaging with reality. His movements became more erratic and animalistic. Often he would cock his head and turn it swiftly from side to side, the movement exaggerated by his mask feathers. The cadence of his voice distorted. Hissing through gritted teeth he chanted. Ever more stressing, ever less human. And throughout all of this, the drum beat continued relentlessly. At times he was out of control of his body, and would throw himself back, raising the drum high into the air. Lhagwa was behind him nearly the whole time, ensuring he could catch him if he flew himself back.

The ceremony was relentless, lasting around 90 minutes. It was an incredible feat of stamina, to do all of that in his outfit. Just watching was an emotionally exhausting experience.

Whether you believe in shamanism or not, I have never experienced someone have such an unrelentingly emotionally heavy out of body experience. It was beautiful and terrible simultaneously. Hypnotizing, I felt high, as if I was on drugs. I think that because I had never experienced anything so different from my cultural expectations, I caught myself perpetually disassociating from what was happening. "This is what a shaman ceremony is like". But this isn’t what a shaman ceremony is like, I’m not viewing this in a museum. This is not a paid actor. This is a shaman. This is a ceremony. He is, according to his religion, convening with spirits. It’s happening in front of me.

After a crescendo I almost couldn't bear, he stopped suddenly, and slouched as if dead. He was dragged outside by Sartlong and Lhagwa, all the while his mantra whispering meekly from his lips. He returned five minutes later.

For the first time in 90 minutes I could hear the river. I was shell shocked. I have never felt more speechless. Anuka softly explains the ceremony is over. He will deliberate with the spirits outside.

He told Kourtney is does not see much good from moving abroad. He says she has already found her man, and that we should stay close to my family. She will have many successes in her work. He said my answer is not yet clear, it will take two years, but I should not do nothing in this time, but that I should start honing my skills and taking steps. Whichever path there will be four main obstacles, and I should turn to my religion or to shamanism, to overcome these obstacles. Either way, it will be critical to always observe where I am in relation to where I came from.

As he told me his wisdom, I strained to listen to the sounds of his voice. The intonation, maintaining eye contact, the sounds. Such a beautiful language upon which my fortune was expressed. Without hearing Anuka’s translation I was on the cusp of crying. He sounded nothing like the spirits did during the ceremony.

He told us he is tired of being a shaman. After an emotionally draining ceremony, we went straight to the teepee. It was 2am and the night was bitterly cold. Anuka started a fire. What just happened? As I lay curled in my sleeping bag, the sounds of his rhythmically distorted voice replay in my mind at deafening volumes, like I was on a powerful hallucinogen. I drift off into a feverish dream. The dogs start barking far in the distance.

## Day 7: Return to Tsagaannuur

In the morning Anuka came back with news from the other teepee. A reindeer had been killed by the bear last night. Godla and Sartlong had already processed the body. I took the camera, kicked on my boots, and rushed outside. By the river I found what remained of the reindeer. The desirable portions of meat were hung on a wooden tripod, while the stomach and liver lay on the ground along with the trachea and antlers. One of their dogs was picking at the stomach.

Closer to their teepee, the hide was stretched across the rocks.

Last night was the first day after the full moon, making it a "blood" ceremony. Did the ceremony cause this to happen? Is this our fault? I asked Anuka. She said it’s possible, but she tried to make light heart of it that the dogs are happy because they will eat well. I felt so guilty.

But Godla and Sartlong seemed to be in good spirits. Anuka said that a reindeer costs 1m, but that well crafted reindeer boots, which require the hide of 1 reindeer, also sell for 1m. It’s better to keep the reindeer alive, but not all is lost. Before, the loss of a reindeer was much worse but now with urbanizing economy, where reindeer boots are fashionable (as well as useful), the loss is not as bad.

After giving them some gifts we had prepared, a multi use flashlight, a headlamp, a lightbulb, some binoculars, we departed. To rid myself of guilt, I told godla I was very sorry for the loss of his reindeer. Anuka translated, don’t worry it became sick yesterday. Reading between the lines, I think he was telling me he doesn’t think it was because of the ceremony.

Shamanism: you have already been given gods gift. You are here. You are feeling. Now you have to give back. You have to give god’s gift.

The trip back to Tsagaannuur was peaceful. On the return trip, me and the bags got swapped and Lhagwa had me on a tight leash. And right as I'm feeling my most demotivated, Lhagwa turns back, points at me with a shit-eating grin, and says one of the only English words he knows: "baby".

At the meeting point where Baagii was supposed to be, he wasn’t. But a bunch of reindeer herders were. They were waiting for a group of Mongolian tourists. A young kid, his father, and his grandpa in law. The dad had married a reindeer herder, but she left him and had another baby with another man from the village. Her father has adopted her ex, and he is living the reindeer life. "Isn't this strange?", Anuka asked.

We give his kid a gift packet. Kourtney exchanges the Mickey Mouse eraser for a Spider-Man eraser, since he’s wearing Spider-Man sneakers.

He’s a very rambunctious kid full of energy. We asked him what he wants to be when he grows up. His answer: a reindeer herder, just like his dad. Although I already knew the answer, I asked whether or not he was old enough to ride a reindeer. He eagerly showed us, hopping on the closest reindeer and commanding it much better than I could have. 

His grandfather is an incredibly small man with a crinkled face and few teeth. He brings over 3 reindeers and wants us to pose beside him. After the photo op his grandson comes tearing through on a reindeer. He’s beating his ass with a stick, directing the docile creature here and there with a boastful confidence.

Then, a car pulled up, and out popped a bunch of people. Anuka recognized all of them. After a while Anuka started to piece it together: Gambut was just joking when he said he was waiting for tourists. He was in fact, just waiting for his family, and here they were.

Out of the car they came, pulling and carrying around various supplies and gear. A large rack of meat was transferred from a thick plastic bag into a large rice sack. Saddles, guns, axes, food, and miscellaneous bags with unknown content were all being arranged on the ground. Clearly it was a very successful trip into town. One by one the reindeers were getting saddled with all the gear. Everyone was working hard and hardly working. Older siblings were taking turns wrestling with the young kid while saddling their reindeers. Everyone was casually chatting and laughing as they readied their gear. In the midst of the activity someone had made a small fire and brewed up milk tea that got passed around with a sour chalky cheese pucks. In contrast to every road trip I went on as a kid, they had no apparent anxiety about whether they were leaving on time, whether everything was packed, or whether the front door was locked. They were blooming with a confidence gained only through a lifetime of nomadic living, where both everywhere and nowhere is a place to call home. And when they were ready, they mounted their reindeer and left as casually as they came. As I watched them disappear into the forest, I couldn’t help but feel a pang of envy for their carefree spirit. But at the same time, I felt inspired to create similar experiences and relationships in my own life, and to approach each new journey with the same confidence they did.

## Day 8: To the eastern reindeer herders

In the morning we went to the kindergarten. Unlike the jovial ceremony we witnessed a few days ago, there was no song and dance. This was the first _real_ day. Outside we were greeted by a happy, plump woman in a short red dress, and her makeup done. She has been the headmaster since Anuka went to the kindergarten over 20 years ago, and it was the 30th year anniversary of the kindergarten. Before that, there was no school in the village, and people sent their children to boarding school at a distant town--or didn't educate them. Needless to say, the headmaster was in a great mood, and her pride showed in her unwipable smile as she opened the door for us.

However, upon crossing through the door's archway, we were greeted terrorized screams of around 30 kindergarteners who had just been stripped away from their families, dumped in a town full of strangers, and here to stay for the foreseeable future. I'm sure the first day of school is tough for most kids, but for many of these children, this was a boarding school, and they knew they wouldn't be seeing their parents for a long time. Needless to say, they were completely inconsolable, and as horrible as it was, I couldn't help but smile at the stark contrast between the joyful, celebratory mood of the headmaster and the sudden, overwhelming outbreak of tears and cries from the children.

At the entrance were donation plaques. There was a kitchen. Outside, Anuka pointed out a child on the seesaw. Her mother died last year. She drove her friend home drunk and on her way home she lost her way on the treacherous Mongolian toads, or lack there of, and drove into the lake. She was found 3 days later.

Then we went to the store. There again happened to be the kindergarteh headmaster. Anuka wanted to buy her gifts, so we agreed to pay for some wine and chocolate, and Anuka gave her 20,000 MNT. She was so happy. Later in the car, Anuka reflected on how grateful the headmaster was. She had had a really tough year. Her husband passed away last Winter. He was a jack of all trades, very successful. And one day he was helping a husband and wife cross a body of water that had frozen over. Since it was some technical offroad driving, he offered to drive the car, and suggested that the wife should get out of the passenger side seat because it was too dangerous. She didn’t, the ice broke, and they both drowned.

After our morning stroll through the village, we headed out for our second adventure into the
Taiga, this
time to the Eastern Reindeer Herders. On our way to the starting point, Baagii points out a Mongolian Irish Pub, which  is Baagii's joke for a group of Mongolians who, through happenstance, find themselves on a hillside drinking vodka, a not all too uncommon occurrence. Beside them are parked 3 motorcycles and a horse. And upon further inspection, one of them is Lhagwa, our horse wrangler! Down rolls and the windows and Baagii and Anuka yell at him. Presumably something like, "get your ass to the start point!"

After some rounds of arvan gurav, Lhagwa finally arrived and the we began the trek. I have the same tempermental horse that I was riding yesterday. When we break for lunch, Lhagwa explained I’m riding a sheep horse, which is what Mongolian children use to herd sheep. No wonder he called me baby.

The journey was thematically similar to the first one. Through some rolling mountains, a descent into a valley, and then follow the river to the camp. There is no trail, just suggestions that probably start as animal trails and then are reinforced by horse and reindeer. But the terrain is so spongy and wet that by the time a trail is formed, it’s already a mud pit.

So we establish our own way through the marsh, bushland, creeks, bogs, and small timber forests. Once again Lhagwa leads the charge with instincts he’s been honing since he himself was a 4 year old child herding sheep.

The reindeer herder vibe is a lot more different here. Tourists are coming all the time. When guests arrive, they visit whoever they want to. Everyone wants guests because they bring gifts. And they pay for their stay. We opt to stay with an old woman. Her daughter was classmates with Anuka and just had a baby a month ago, so the old woman is all alone, except for her grandson who just finished high school. Her name is Buyantogtokh--or just Buyan for short. She is very nice, immediately asking if we are warm enough, if we want tea. And she’s incredible. She’s completely self sufficient at managing her reindeer and living in the harsh conditions of the taiga. To me she looked 75 at least, but she was only 65. This lifestyle ages people. The average lifespan in Mongolia is just 65.

We’re stay in her teepee next door. After we’re settled, she comes over for dinner that Anuka has made. The cards get pulled out, along with the vodka I win my first game in 13. Then vodka has been released and I tactically won against Kourtney and Lhagwa. After getting roasted about never paying Anuka for the times she ein against him, he handed me a crisp 5k bill. We started laughing, talking about gore it’s my first win. Then Kourtney says I owe it to Anuka because she just beat me. We all start laughing harder. I was feeling pretty rich with my first earnings, and now it’s going straight to Anuka. I decide I should take a picture of it before giving it up. Everyone thought it was hilarious that I was taking a picture of it. I’m happy and drunk. Lagwa is drunk and snoring. The furnace is burning and the wood crackles. The flickering flames illuminate the teepee walls. I can see a bright star from my vantage point on my wooden plank cot. I feel amongst friends.

## Day 9: Autumnal Migration

We arrived at a very lucky time. The herders are moving to their final camp before winter. The reindeer need to move into the forest, where they can plump up before winter. Here there is a lot of grass. Also In The Valley, the reminders travel far and are difficult to herd. In the new location the reindeer will stay close.

From around 9 in the morning the tribe is bustling with activity. Everyone’s life belongings are being tossed outside the teepees, and organized into plastic bags, fabric bags, and leather bags. Solar panels, lightbulbs, mattresses, furnaces, ropes, dishes, antlers, leather, reindeer milk, chainsaws, cutting boards, axes.

When everything is out, the teepee canvas is removed in pieces and sometimes used to store belongings. From morning until night, the herders were busy at work. Buyantogtokh led Kourtney and I to her reindeer milk stash in the forest. Dug under the moss near a slowly moving creek, she pulled out at least 40 plastic bottles of reindeer milk from 3 separate spots. She would look around, and then in a eureka moment peel off some nondescript clumps of moss to reveal the plastic water bottles that had been repurposed for storing her milk reserves.

We gave help where we could, but besides rote physical labour, we weren’t that useful so we just enjoyed the show. One by one, the herder families saddled up their reindeer with everything and the kitchen sink. They tied them in lines, with the biggest in front, and babies in the back. This was actually the minority of the reindeers, and those without saddles were herded on the fly by skilled horsemen. The others mounted their own reindeers and led the saddled reindeers. Then they took off down The Valley from which we came.

Within 90 minutes the camp was mostly deserted, except for a few people who were still waiting for their reindeer to return, Buyantogtokh included. Anuka, Lhagwa, Kourtney and I saddled up and followed suit down The Valley. By chance, a herd of about 20 reindeer, guided by a single herder, crossed our path. For a fleeting, magical minute, we found ourselves engulfed in a sea of reindeer, their majestic presence surrounding us from every angle.

The journey took around 2 hours. In the final half hour, reindeer with empty saddles were being led back to the original camp to pick up what couldn’t be carried on the first trip. We arrived at camp and it was a situation. Piles and piles of belongings beside teepees being erected. horses and reindeers and dogs all throughout the sparse forest, some tethered some not. It would only be a matter of hours until we became completely desensitized to the sight of large reindeer within touchable vicinity.

We jumped around helping people. In particular, we’re helped a new mom with no husband. Her family was the teepee next door and wasn’t helping that much.

We meet a Chinese American guy Kyle. Our guide is way better.

Anuka knows everyone and all the drama. We play some 13. News is out that a tourist couple knows how to play.

## Day 10: Making the rounds

We woke up and gave away the rest of our gifts to families that we had met. I really liked how well Anuka knew them because all of our gifts ended up being quite personalized. For example, we have the vodka to a man we helped unpack who had trouble sleeping and Anuka thought he would drink it responsibly. His wife laughed heartily when we told him that.

They were very interested to hear I was from Canada. They knew that reindeer were in Canada. They asked if we had reindeer herders. I wasn't sure, but I guessed yes. Turns out I wasn't totally wrong either. In the 30s there was an effort to introduce reindeer herding to northern communities dubbed the [Canadian Reindeer Project](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reindeer_Station). It wasn't as successful as projected, but it's still practiced today.

Then we found Buyantogtokh. She got in late last night but has clearly settled well because she was out and about. We gave her some durable river sheathed twist ties that my sister bought me for Christmas a couple years ago. We thought it could save her likely arthritic hands from some of the endless rope tying necessitated by herder lifestyle. We also gave her a waterproof sack.

We gave our host 25 bullets, and as we were deciding what to do with the other 25, some guys came in to play 13. Anuka has the idea to offer either 5000 or 2 bullets. And it was off to the races. The energy is high. People are smoking, slamming their cards down. We play a couple games, but wr got to go, so the games end. Everyone is happy and eager, but upset the games are ending. Later, we ended up divvying the remaining bullets to the players.

Since we gave the owner such a valuable present, he called us over. He has his reindeer saddled and brought us over to ride it.

Then as quickly as we came, we were gone. The ride back was beautiful, and we went fast. We trotted for at least an hour through beautiful forest. I cantered with my horse and for the first time in the trip my horse and I synergized. Back in Tsagaannuur Anuka’s mom made white fish soup. Anuka asked us if we are ok with her baby coming with us back to Ulaanbaatar. That way her and Baagii wouldn't have to make the trip back to Tsagaannuur until November. Having experienced the trip first hand, we agreed unconditionally that the baby should come, but in the end, it made sense for Baagii to return so that he could continue working on their house, which he was building next to their parents residence.

## Day 11: Sheep dumplings

Anuka says Baagii is about to kill a sheep because we need meat, and we can watch if we want. Out back, Baagii has a sheep tied up by the car. He dragged it over to the back of the house, positioned it on its back, and with a relatively small knife tried to make an incision in its underbelly. But the knife wasn’t sharp enough so he called over Anuka’s mom who brought a bigger knife. He got through all the wool and made an incision without the sheep making a fuss. Then he shoved his hand through the sheep, at which point the sheep started to kick, and then with a mighty force he ripped his bloody hand out. He showed us later, during the dissection, that he had plucked a main artery that runs just below the sheep’s spinal cord. Without much fight, the sheep was dead within a minute or two. We go to the school. The girls are so fascinated with Kourtney’s hair, and indiscreetly whisper, wide eyed. We find a group of 3 girls and 2 boys who share a room together. Kourtney lays out the remaining frozen, iron man, and Thor pencil cases for them to pick their favourites. Without any arguing they all picked their favorites. We talked with them for a bit. They were very shy so to break the ice we had Kourtney count to 10 in Mongolian, which conjured some laughter. Then one of the girls counted to 10 in English. They wanted to be basketball player, singers, and teachers. We return and pack up. Anukas mom gave us some pendants made of reindeer. Anuka prepares us a plate of heart liver intestine and stomach. This is a delicacy amongst Mongolians. Thighs, ribs, these can be stored. But stomach, liver etc We try the heart. It’s very different but palatable. We tried a piece of the stomach and that was enough. Embarrassed, we return the plate. Inside, there is an innards boil and the energy is high. People are picking up the small intestine and knifing off pieces. Everyone has an electric appetite. Anuka tells us that the younger generation, especially from the city, thinks this is dog food, that it’s uncivilized. But it is a part of Anukas culture, and although Kourtney and I think they taste was disgusting, the practice of making full use of the animal is admirable, and beautiful. Afterwards Kourtney and I had a long discussion about our meat consumption. How can we be so disconnected from animal and meat? During the feast, someone came over to borrow Anukas moms weigh scale. They picked a bunch of blueberries and wanted to know how much. They were invited in, and they gladly took part in the feast. Afterwards, they weighed the blueberries. 58kg at 8000 per kilo, or 464000. When they left, the gate was left open and 3 cows came onto the property, happy to have found fresh grass. Anuka shood them away. We drove to lagwas autum home. It’s a beautiful little one room cabin. Inside his mother in law prepares surcream with bread, chalky sour dairy pucks, and of course, milk tea. On one of the beds is a plump little cat, which is rare in Mongolia. " don’t like cats", Anuka said. Around us are innumerable horse racing medals mounted on the walls that lagwa has won. Clearly we were in good hands. We play some poker, I win. Meanwhile Kourtney is making cow pies in the blasting wind and rain with 0 cover. The grandma is talking nonstop, and Anuka can’t get a word in. Lagwa calls and he’s taking down some tourist gares. Since it’s getting dark, Baagii Kourtney and I jump in the car to help. Lagwa is loading up two gares into his "Russian truck", aka a xxxxxx. After 30 minutes the truck is loaded. Not much in terms of safety’. The truck can barely start, and we are on a relatively step slope on wet grass (no roads of course). Kourtney convinces the lagwas wife to get into our car after Baagii pointed and said "danger car, big danger car". We follow behind as lagwa barrels across the slope side, slipping several times in what I thought would be a tip, potentially rolling into the lake. His wife, safely in our car, would go "ooooooooo!" And then nervously laugh each time it happened. Also eventful was a mid journey horse herding where lagwa brazenly went off course in an attempt to herd a group of his horses a few km from the premise. When we got back Anuka was in the middle of preparing sheep steamed dumplings from one of the hind legs. Before, during, and after the consumption of dumplings, we played cards ona fold up table under a flickering hospital white light bulb. I won the first round but lagwa reigned supreme for the rest of the night. Must have been home court advantage (edit: on second thought maybe his strategy was to get us all drunk, which he did).

## Day 12: XXX

In the morning we said goodbye to lagwa, his wife, his mother in law, and there more than 400 goats and sheep. We gifted lagwa and his family a flashlight setup that can be powered multiple different ways and a pair of pocket binoculars. Although Kourtney and I shared zero linguistic overlap with lagwa, he had become a dear friend of ours over the last week. He guided us safely through the taiga. We broke bread with him, assembled teepees, and disassembled gares. He inspired us with his selfless attitude towards hard work that benefits all of those around him. And what he’s most proud about, he beat us in cards many times, we laughed hard at the wins and losses. How long is the drive to kohvul lake? I asked 250km. The time I cannot say. She laughed and I followed suit. I realized it’s a question impossible to answer, unless you’re a shaman, perhaps. It depends 100% on conditions. The day was rainy, which will affect which mountain passes we choose. We would get further information for passing cars. This river is too high, this steep section too muddy. And thus from our available options our path would emerge. Whatever would come to be, we knew it would be a long day, as even during the rarest and most ideal stretches of land our speed wouldn’t surpass 30 mph. After car pushes, countless river crossings, failing power steering and subsequent calls to Baagiis car mechanic, we stop to let the car cool down for the 20th time. A nomad rolls up with on a horse and a baggage horse. He’s in the king process of moving camp. He sees Kourtney’s camera and wants us to take his picture. Baagii says he will send him the picture but after he drove away he still didn’t grab his contact info. I asked Baagii and he said it’s easy, he’s from such an such village and every village has a Facebook group. Hell just post it there. At 730, 10 hours since our departure, we made it to asphalt. Incidentally, 2 minutes away is the 50’ 100’ lonlat, with an architectural monument pinpointing the spot. Even more incidentally, Anukas father was commissioned by the mayor of the closest village to design the monument, and was promised some property on hoskul lake as his commission. But after the monument was built and before the keys were handed over, the election cycle brought a new mayor into office, who never acknowledged the contract. Kourtney and I hike up to the spot, refusing to take pictures. Baagii cooks instant ramen. For the last 45km to hoskul lake, Baagii, with unwavering concentration, navigates the 2 lane highway. By western standards it’s shoddy, but after 8 days of roadless mountain driving, it feels like the autoban. As the road signs fly past us at 40mph, I daydream about taking Anuka and Baagii to an American amusement park. We arrive at the hoskul lake in the dark and clammer into our sleeping bags.

## Day 13: XXX

In the morning we went for a motorboat ride. The boat driver was Batsur, one of their university friends. He worked hard as a boat driver for 10 years until he could buy his own speed boat. Now he makes good money driving his own boat. Hoskul lake is a big deal for Mongolians. visiting the landlocked country’s largest lake is a tourist destination for foreigners and natives alike. And for Mongolians, most who can’t swim, ripping around on a motorboat is a thrilling novelty. While foreign tourism has mostly finished for the year, there is still plenty of domestic tourism in mid september. lining the shore are mini cottages, houses, and teepees for rent. After breaking the ice with batsur with a rock skipping contest, we got it on our heads that the 5 of us would go to karaoke. To prepare, we went to the shop and bought 15 beers of various Mongolian brands, and then drank the night away. Baagii is getting more communicative with his limited English. It’s very impressive to see how much he can communicate with his minuscule lexicon. We get emo about our feels. Batsur says many good things about us. We learn that batsur and Baagii used to play counterstrike 1.6 together, that Baagii once drank 6L of koumice—joking that from the center of the gare he was projectile vomiting outside. Baagii thanked us for respecting his culture by watching the whole sheep killing. As we drank earlier in the night Baagii took the remainder of the sheep leg that Anuka used to make soup, grabbed a knife, and went to town, not stopping until it was picked clean. It wasn’t because he’s hungry, she said. It’s because he is respecting the animal. She also said if you are a guest and you eat like Baagii is eating the owners will be so so appreciative because it means you are respecting their hospitality.

## Day 14: XXX

In the morning we drive to murun to get the car fixed. In the way we visit deer stones. (Wiki). Still to this day murun people are buried in the surrounding mountains, which are named lungs. Outside the fenced area, a woman and her grandchild emerge from the groundskeeper gare. With silent confidence, the 3-4 year old child walks up to Kourtney and gently holds her hand. They sit down togrtber and she kisses Kourtney on the arm, but otherwise disengages from Kourtney’s smiles. Last spring was a terrible spring, with bitter winds and no grass. Mongolia had 72 million livestock. Now Anuka thinks it could be less than 60 million. When there is such profound levels of death, it’s too much meat to eat, and the quality of the meat is so poor, so herders either bury the bodies or cut open their abdomens and let the vultures and various other birds dissect the carcass. Lagwa, with his 400 livestock, suffered great loss during this tough year, losing about 200 goats and sheep, Anuka predicts. This is the life of the nomad. You can’t put your money into a bank, it roams freely. Stuck behind a huge flock of sheep being herded down a road on the outskirts of murun, Anuka, Kourtney and I jump out of the car to visit the monastery to our right while Baagii fixes the car. We go for a stroll through the monastery. There is a reading and we walk in. It’s full and there is no space to sit. Everyone is staring at us. Anuka thinks it was a funeral procession of some sort. Then we walk to the supermarket where we will meet Baagii. Along the way we saw some statues, street art, illegally high apartment buildings, and a congregation of people attending a wedding event. Half the men were in suits, half in dells. Baagii bought us gifts, for Kourtney, he nights her a new phone screen protector. Hers is so broken it’s clouding her screen. And for both of us he bought us a pack of novelty cards, where each card is a picture of a Mongolian wrestler. He says "Mongolian playboy". Then we were back on the (paved 🙏) road. We decided we would stay with the nomads we encountered and had koumice with. That doesn’t mean this was arranged with them. We were just going to show up. Anuka wasn’t kidding when she said Mongolians have no word for "go away". When we showed up Handa was just finishing a horse milking session and seamlessly transitioned into hostess mode, preparing milk tea and cookies with surcream, and of course, koumice. Their kid had left for school, living in a 50 bed dormitory in a village school around 100km away. He was the kid who wanted us to send a message to Michael Jordan. In his place, was Kourtney’s newest obsession: a small pregnant cat gnawing a sheep thigh bone.

It was a poetic experience spending our last rural night where we experienced the greatest culture shock on our first visit. The first time we met Handa, we had no idea about nomadic life. I was getting handed a bowl of fermented horse milk being dolled out by an insistent man in a gare with a large cow skin full of unrefridgerated dairy product. I was eating a sour hard cheese and just moments before Kourtney was milking a horse and I was on the back of a man’s motorcycle. All the while we couldn’t believe that Anuka and Baagii had never met these friendly folks. It was so much culture shock I was fighting back an adrenaline rush. But this time was different. Chill even. We’d not only lived in gares, we’d disassembled them. I played a friendly game of 13 while casually sipping koumice. Kourtney helped herd the baby cows. Then we stirred the newest milk contribution into the massive cow skin bag. As well as we felt we were fitting in, that's not to say we're fit nomadic life. Case in point: Handa's daily summer routine. Every two hours she milks the horses. From 5am to 9pm. And at the end of the day, she needs to incorporate the new milk with the forever soup of koumice by stirring it vigorously for 90 minutes continuously. This helps incorporate the yeast and kickstarts the fermentation. She was so happy that Baagii, Kourtney, Anuka and I took shifts so she could rest her body. We were really starting to feel like Mongolians. Yet that night I got the dairy trots bad, a sour reminder that my western body has become accustomed to a lifestyle not so easily swayed from.

## Day 15: XXX

When we left, I got handas whatsapp number. She said her kid is still deciding what to write to Michael Jordan. I don’t know how I’ll get the message to him, but I’ll cross that bridge when we get there. We leave the asphalt one last time to visit the national park. On our way is around a 2 kilometres stretch where at least 600 horses are freely roaming. We are in the xxx province, which is famous for koumice. Figures. We stop by a nomads gare for some water. A raspy old dogs bark serves as the doorbell and a little girl opens the door, peaking, half concealed by the door, smiling at us. Her mom opens the door fully and they agree to fill our water. Baagii offers an apple to the girl, and a small knitted purse. She sits confidently on a stool near the car. Then Kourtney rolls down her window. The girl stares and her demeanour changes. She runs to her mother, whose filling out bottle.

After endless driving on asphalt grass dirt and mud, we arrive at the national park, where the only truly wild group of horses still exists. Facts.

As luck would have it, we would see more than 40 horses. Amazing to think this is around 1/10th of the population. It’s dark by the time we leave and we’re still around 2 hours from Anukas apartment. With no retroreflectors demarcating opposing lanes, and no laws governing how bright high beams can be, what color they are, or when they should be turned off, it was a blinding performance. Never have I seen such dangerous driving conditions. To Baagii it was just another day in the life. On the way we talk about what Baagii would do for work if he moved to Canada. We settled on butcher. He would so good. "And he could live with us", Kourtney and I agreed. "And pick the meat off the bones to eat for free!" Anuka added while laughing. We had to drive through the heart of the city to get to Anukas apartment. Even at 10pm the ruleless traffic was terrible. As we drive from the outskirts into the city center, petrol stations, shacks, and gares transition continuously into a newer, taller, and more metropolitan landscape. the neon sign real estate is dominated by Korean restaurants, followed by karaoke. Most of the other signs are in syrillic. After an hour of laneless mayhem, we get to a Korean restaurant.
