---
layout: post
title: "Pooltool is alive and well"
categories: [pooltool]
series: 6
excerpt: "A brief update after a long hiatus"
comments: true
authors: [evan]
image:
  feature: pooltool/pooltool_banner.png
  display: true
---

{% capture images %}{{site.url}}/images/pooltool/pooltool-graphics{% endcapture %}
{% include _toc.html %}

## It's been a while

It's been almost 2 years since my last update on pooltool. Usually that's an indication that the project is dead, but I'm here doing CPR. In fact, despite the radio silence, I've been working on pooltool alongside what has been an eventful 2 years with finishing my PhD, starting a new job, moving countries, yada, yada, yada. During that time I could never find the energy to give a formal update on the project, but that's coming to an end right now!

Since it's been so long, there's really no hope of giving any satisfyingly detailed report with commit hashes, correlating features with code snippets, etc. Instead I'm keep things relaxed with a devlog update. Please enjoy:

{% include youtube_embed.html id="FIXME" %}

# ---------------------

Things to talk about:

- Date
- Second devlog

- pooltool is infinitely more popular since the last time: https://star-history.com/#ekiefl/pooltool&Date
- v0.2 is out
- thank you for everyone who has showed interest in the project

- It's been so long since the last update that there's far too much to summarize

- graphics
- engine speed
- and the codebase

- graphical update (blog)
    - "picture says a thousand words"

- switched to numba
    - contribution from chaodev1 (name check) that sped things up even further

- completely redesigned the codebase
    - dataclass for all of the system objects like pool balls, pockets, table, etc.
    - out-of-box serialization and deserialization of shots (quick demo)

- I'm not sure what the future holds
    - Create a sandbox game that allows users to explore and experiment with pool physics.
    - Develop a realistic simulation of pool physics, especially for ball-ball and ball-cushion collisions.
    - Attract more users by adding proper menu systems, game modes, and enhanced graphical realism through 3D models, PBR materials, and custom shaders.
    - Improve the overall user experience by making pooltool more interactive and game-like.
    - Expand the simulation to include 3D elements, allowing balls to come off the table and introducing ball-air and ball-slate interactions.
    - Address the shortcomings of the break shot, to make it more realistic or at least visually convincing.
